Hello and thank you for taking the time to delve
deeper into this session. My name is Vladimir
Merisca, Instructional Design Coordinator
at the Office of Educational Development.
Let's get right into what the statistics
in your item analysis reports mean.
The exam stat we're looking at
here is the difficulty index
what that measures is the proportion of students
who answered an item correctly. The higher
the value the greater the proportion of studentswho
responded to an item correctly. The lower the value
indicates that fewer students got the question
correct. Those values are also known as p-values
a difficulty index or p-value of equal to or
greater than 70 percent means your question would
be considered easy to very easy. If your p-value
is in the mid-range of equal to or less than 30
then you're in the difficulty range
for values equal to or less than 30
That means your question falls
within the range of very difficult
For exam questions that have p-values
of 90 or higher or 20 and lower
consider adjusting your questions or not using
them at all in future exams. For example on those
90 or higher items consider restructuring
your questions' lead-in or distractors
On those 20 percent or lower items review
them for possible confusing language or
perhaps it's a topic you may want to
amend in your future class instruction
A point biserial statistic indicates whether
getting the question correct correlates
positively or negatively with performing
well on the exam overall. In other words
if students scored well on the exam as a
whole they should on average score well
on the item students who performed
poorly on the item did poorly on the exam
A point biserial closer to zero indicates
little correlation between the performance
of the question and the performance on the test
as a whole. This may indicate that the question
tested on the material outside of the other
learning outcomes assessed on the exam or that
this may indicate that the question tested on
material outside of the other learning outcomes
assessed on the exam or that it was a mastery item
where all or most of the class got the question
correct. A point biserial closer to 1
indicates a very strong correlation
negative point biserial scores indicate
a negative correlation between the two
Your report stats will often reference Upper 27
percent and Lower 27 percent. These upper and Lower
groups of students are based on the top 27 percent
and bottom 27 percent of performers respectively
The top 27 of scores represent
the percentage of students who
answered the item correctly, whereas the bottom
27 percent of scores represent the percentage of
students who answered the item incorrectly. 27
is an industry standard used in item analyses.
The discrimination index of a
question shows the difference
in performance between the upper
and lower 27 percent of performers
That value is determined by subtracting
the difficulty index of the lower 27
from the difficulty index of the upper 27 percent
negative values of values nearing 0.0 indicates
that the bottom 27 percent did better. Those
items should be considered for removal.
Here's some more guidance on discrimination
index numbers typically for the discriminating
items discrimination index above 30
percent is considered pretty good
Kuder-Richardson Formula 20 or your kr20 stat
measures exam items reliability and consistency
in other words the statistic reflects the
likelihood that your students will yield
the same performance if given the same exam a
higher value for the exam indicates a strong
relationship between items on the test a
value of at least 70 percent is desirable
A low kr20 means that the results
would be more likely to be different
Let's take a look at a section
of an item analysis report
In it you see your kr20 value alongside a mean
value which is the average score of all your
exam takers. There's also a median score here
which marks the midpoint of exam taker scores
and there's a standard deviation value. The
standard deviation indicates the variation of
exam scores. A low standard deviation indicates
that students' scores were close to the average,
while a high standard deviation indicates
that there was a large variation in scores.
In this item analysis report there's
a 94 difficulty index or p-value which
indicates a very easy question that your
team may want to consider for adjustment.
Your discrimination index is 11 which is
considered a poor discrimination value,
thereby requiring further scrutiny the
point biserial of 27, which is less than
30 percent. So you will want to discuss if
there were any issues with this question
Be mindful that while the
psychometric rules might be
generally correct, there are other non-statistical
factors that can influence the performance of a
question which must also be taken into account
when determining a question's validity,
are the nuts and bolts behind the statistics
of an item analysis report. You can always
contact an OED instructional designer for
further guidance.Thank you for joining us!